README.md, before:

## pywsgim

pywgsim is a python wrapper around the wgsim short read simulator. 

* https://github.com/lh3/wgsim

## Usage

    pywgsim -h

## Installation

    pip install pywgsim
                 
## Changes

The original code for wgsim has been expanded a little bit. The main changes are:

1. The information on the mutations introduced by `wgsim` are now generated in GFF format.
1. There is a new flag called `--fixed` that generates the same `N` number of reads for each chromosome.
1. The separator character in the read name has been changed from `_` to `|`. This follows a more widely accepted standard (i.e. NCBI) and allows identifying the contig name from the read name. 

In the default operation of wgsim the `N` reads are distribute such to create a uniform coverage across all chromosomes (longer chromosomes get a larger fraction of N)
 
## Mutation output

The output generated by `pywgsim` looks like this:

    ##gff-version 3
    #
    # N=1000 err_rate=0.02 mut_rate=0.001 indel_frac=0.15000001 indel_ext=0.25 size=500 std=50 len1=100 len2=100 seed=1606965870
    #
    NC_001416.1     wgsim   snp     1047    1047    .       +       .       Name=A/C;Ref=A;Alt=C;Type=hom
    NC_001416.1     wgsim   snp     1308    1308    .       +       .       Name=C/Y;Ref=C;Alt=Y;Type=het
    NC_001416.1     wgsim   snp     1533    1533    .       +       .       Name=G/T;Ref=G;Alt=T;Type=hom
    NC_001416.1     wgsim   snp     2472    2472    .       +       .       Name=C/M;Ref=C;Alt=M;Type=het
    NC_001416.1     wgsim   snp     2964    2964    .       +       .       Name=A/M;Ref=A;Alt=M;Type=het
    NC_001416.1     wgsim   snp     5375    5375    .       +       .       Name=G/R;Ref=G;Alt=R;Type=het
    
    
## New read names
    
The read names are now of the form:

       @NC_002945.4|1768156|1768694|0:0:0|4:0:0|4

Where:

   * `NC_002945.4` is the contig name that the fragment was generated from.
   * `1768156` is the left-most position of the fragment.
   * `1768694` is the right-most position of the fragment.
   * `0:0:0` are the number of errors, substitutions and indels in the left-most read of the pair.
   * `4:0:0` are the number of errors, substitutions and indels in the right-most read of the pair.
   * `4` is the read pair number, unique, per contig.

## Help

    $ pywgsim -h
    
prints:

    usage: pywgsim [-h] [-a 1.fq] [-b 2.fq] [-N 1000] [-f] [-e 0.02] [-r 0.001]
                   [-R 0.15] [-X 0.25] [-D 500] [-s 50] [-S 0]
                   genome
    
    positional arguments:
      genome                the FASTA reference sequence
    
    optional arguments:
      -h, --help            show this help message and exit
      -a 1.fq, --r1 1.fq    name for first in pair
      -b 2.fq, --r2 2.fq    name for second in pair
      -N 1000, --num 1000   number of read pairs
      -f, --fixed           each chromosome gets N sequences
      -e 0.02, --err 0.02   the base error rate
      -r 0.001, --mut 0.001
                            rate of mutations
      -R 0.15, --frac 0.15  fraction of indels
      -X 0.25, --ext 0.25   probability an indel is extended
      -D 500, --dist 500    outer distance between the two ends
      -s 50, --stdev 50     standard deviation
      -S 0, --seed 0        seed for the random generator
      
## API

The interface to `wgsim` can be made in a single function call 

    from pywgsim import wgsim

    wgsim.core(r1="r1.fq", r2="r2.fq", ref="genome.fa", err_rate=0.02, mut_rate=0.001, indel_frac=0.15, indel_ext=0.25, max_n=0.05, is_hap=0, N=100000,  dist=500, stdev=50, size_l=100, size_r=100, is_fixed=0, seed=0)

Commit message:

also works as compiled executable

README.md, after:

## pywsgim

pywgsim is a python wrapper around the wgsim short read simulator. 

* https://github.com/lh3/wgsim

## Usage

    pywgsim -h

## Installation

    pip install pywgsim
    
There code also works as a standalone, C compiled executable.

Clone the repository and run `make` to get a compiled version of `pywgsim` in the `scripts` directory. The short versions
of the flags are identical to `wgsim`.

## Changes

The original code for wgsim has been altered as follows:

1. The output for the mutations introduced by `wgsim` are now generated in GFF format.
1. The separator character in the read name has been changed from `_` to `|`. 
1. There is a new flag called `--fixed` that generates the same `N` number of reads for each chromosome.

The read naming now follows a more widely accepted standard (i.e. NCBI) and allows for easier identifying the contig name from the read name. 

In the default operation of wgsim the `N` reads are distribute such to create a uniform coverage across all chromosomes (longer chromosomes get a larger fraction of N)
 
## Mutation output

The output generated by `pywgsim` looks like this:

    ##gff-version 3
    #
    # N=1000 err_rate=0.02 mut_rate=0.001 indel_frac=0.15000001 indel_ext=0.25 size=500 std=50 len1=100 len2=100 seed=1606965870
    #
    NC_001416.1     wgsim   snp     1047    1047    .       +       .       Name=A/C;Ref=A;Alt=C;Type=hom
    NC_001416.1     wgsim   snp     1308    1308    .       +       .       Name=C/Y;Ref=C;Alt=Y;Type=het
    NC_001416.1     wgsim   snp     1533    1533    .       +       .       Name=G/T;Ref=G;Alt=T;Type=hom
    NC_001416.1     wgsim   snp     2472    2472    .       +       .       Name=C/M;Ref=C;Alt=M;Type=het
    NC_001416.1     wgsim   snp     2964    2964    .       +       .       Name=A/M;Ref=A;Alt=M;Type=het
    NC_001416.1     wgsim   snp     5375    5375    .       +       .       Name=G/R;Ref=G;Alt=R;Type=het
    
    
## New read names
    
The read names are now of the form:

       @NC_002945.4|1768156|1768694|0:0:0|4:0:0|4

Where:

   * `NC_002945.4` is the contig name that the fragment was generated from.
   * `1768156` is the left-most position of the fragment.
   * `1768694` is the right-most position of the fragment.
   * `0:0:0` are the number of errors, substitutions and indels in the left-most read of the pair.
   * `4:0:0` are the number of errors, substitutions and indels in the right-most read of the pair.
   * `4` is the read pair number, unique, per contig.

## Help

    $ pywgsim -h
    
prints:
    
    usage: pywgsim [-h] [-e 0.02] [-D 500] [-s 50] [-N 1000] [-1 70] [-2 70]
                   [-r 0.001] [-R 0.15] [-X 0.25] [-S 0] [-A 0.05] [-f]
                   genome [read1] [read2]
    
    positional arguments:
      genome                FASTA reference sequence
      read1                 FASTQ file for first in pair
      read2                 FASTQ file for second in pair
    
    optional arguments:
      -h, --help            show this help message and exit
      -e 0.02, --err 0.02   the base error rate
      -D 500, --dist 500    outer distance between the two ends
      -s 50, --stdev 50     standard deviation
      -N 1000, --num 1000   number of read pairs
      -1 70, --L1 70        length of the first read
      -2 70, --L2 70        length of the second read
      -r 0.001, --mut 0.001
                            rate of mutations
      -R 0.15, --frac 0.15  fraction of indels
      -X 0.25, --ext 0.25   probability an indel is extended
      -S 0, --seed 0        seed for the random generator
      -A 0.05, --amb 0.05   disregard if the fraction of ambiguous bases higher
                            than FLOAT
      -f, --fixed           each chromosome gets N sequences
          
## API

The C interface to `wgsim` is accessible as a single function call 

    from pywgsim import wgsim

    wgsim.core(r1="r1.fq", r2="r2.fq", ref="genome.fa", err_rate=0.02, mut_rate=0.001, indel_frac=0.15, indel_ext=0.25, max_n=0.05, is_hap=0, N=100000,  dist=500, stdev=50, size_l=100, size_r=100, is_fixed=0, seed=0)
